Gateway-api: docs for BackendTLSPolicy (#46123)
cilium-team/cilium: Documentation/network/servicemesh/gateway-api/backendtlspolicy.rst

   apiVersion: v1
   kind: Service
   metadata:
     labels:
       app: backend
       service: backend
     name: backend
   spec:
     selector:
       app: backend
     ports:
     - name: https
       port: 443
       protocol: TCP
       targetPort: 8443

Create the BackendTLSPolicy to tell the Cilium Gateway to use a TLS connection with the backend.

.. code-block:: yaml

   apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
   kind: BackendTLSPolicy
   metadata:
     name: enable-backend-tls
     namespace: default
   spec:
     targetRefs:
     - group: ''
       kind: Service
       name: backend
       sectionName: https
     validation:
       caCertificateRefs:
       - name: example-ca
         group: ''
         kind: ConfigMap
       hostname: www.example.com

Patch the HTTPRoute backend reference, so that it uses the correct port edited in the backend service.

.. code-block:: shell-session

   kubectl patch HTTPRoute backend --type=json --patch '
    - op: replace
      path: /spec/rules/0/backendRefs/0/port
      value: 443
   '

Testing the backend TLS connection
==================================

Try curl the through the Gateway.

.. code-block:: shell-session

>    $ curl -vI --resolve "www.example.com:80:<YOUR_GATEWAY_EXTERNAL_IP>" http://www.example.com:80/get

Reviewer: nit: maybe worth to change `-vI` to `-v` in both `curl` commands and use the JSON response from the echo server to showcase that the echo server actually received TLS encrypted traffic.

without backend TLS encryption:

```
❯ curl --resolve www.example.com:80:172.19.255.1 http://www.example.com/get
{
 "path": "/get",
 "host": "www.example.com",
 "method": "GET",
 "proto": "HTTP/1.1",
 "headers": {
  "Accept": [
   "*/*"
  ],
  "User-Agent": [
   "curl/8.20.0"
  ],
  "X-Envoy-Internal": [
   "true"
  ],
  "X-Forwarded-For": [
   "172.19.0.1"
  ],
  "X-Forwarded-Proto": [
   "http"
  ],
  "X-Request-Id": [
   "bb913f3e-7538-4873-88e4-25499fe5b3ff"
  ]
 },
 "namespace": "default",
 "ingress": "",
 "service": "",
 "pod": "backend-86c6c76f-ptczl"
}%
```

with backend TLS encryption

```
❯ curl --resolve www.example.com:80:172.19.255.1 http://www.example.com/get
...
 "tls": {
  "version": "TLSv1.3",
  "serverName": "www.example.com",
  "negotiatedProtocol": "http/1.1",
  "cipherSuite": "TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256"
 }
}% 
```

Author: good feedback 👍 thanks @mhofstetter ⭐ 🐐

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

.. _gs_gateway_backendtlspolicy:

************************
BackendTLSPolicy Example
************************

This example will use the ``echo-server`` sample application to demonstrate how to use BackendTLSPolicy.

You will need ``mkcert`` tool to generate certificates. See the tool's `upstream site <github-mkcert>`_ for details.

This task uses a self-signed CA, and is only for demonstration purposes.

Deploy ``echo-server``
======================

Apply the following to deploy the ``echo-server``.

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../examples/kubernetes/servicemesh/echo-server.yaml
   :language: yaml

Apply the following to create a Gateway and HTTPRoute for the ``echo-server``:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../examples/kubernetes/servicemesh/echo-server-gatewaypi-httproute.yaml
   :language: yaml

Test the sample application:

.. code-block:: shell-session

   $ curl -v --resolve www.example.com:80:<GATEWAY_IP_ADDRESS> http://www.example.com/get

It should return the information about the request.

.. code-block:: shell-session

>    $ {

Reviewer 2: Is this actually a shell session? The output looks like json. There's a `$` which implies there's a command, but this doesn't look like a shell invocation.
```suggestion
.. code-block:: json

   {
```

Author: The response of the curl looks like that, it's a copy paste of the response

Reviewer 2: I guess it's just syntax highlighting in the end, but the impression if you syntax-highlight with a shell session and frame it with `$ other-stuff`, it'll be formatted as though the reader should run `other-stuff`. Probably it's easier to read with json syntax highlighting?

        "curl/8.20.0"
       ],
       "X-Envoy-Internal": [
        "true"
       ],
       "X-Forwarded-For": [
        "172.19.0.1"
       ],
       "X-Forwarded-Proto": [
        "http"
       ],
       "X-Request-Id": [
        "bb913f3e-7538-4873-88e4-25499fe5b3ff"
       ]
      },
      "namespace": "default",
      "ingress": "",
      "service": "",
      "pod": "backend-86c6c76f-ptczl"
     }

Generate demo TLS Certificates
==============================

Generate the certificates and keys for example.com.

First, create the root certificate.

.. code-block:: shell-session

   mkcert www.example.com

This will output the certificate and key in the current directory.

Create the secret and configmap in your cluster
===============================================

Store the cert and key into a Kubernetes Secret.

.. code-block:: shell-session

   kubectl create secret tls example-cert --key=www.example.com-key.pem --cert=www.example.com.pem

Create a configmap in your cluster.

.. code-block:: shell-session

   kubectl create configmap example-ca --from-file=ca.crt=www.example.com.pem

Setup TLS between gateway and backend
=====================================

> Patch the backend deployment to enable TLS. We will mount the TLS certificate secret into the backend container as a volume.

Reviewer 2: nit:
```suggestion
Patch the backend deployment to enable TLS. The following command mounts the TLS certificate secret into the backend container as a volume.
```

.. code-block:: shell-session

   kubectl patch deployment backend --type=json --patch '
  - op: add
    path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/volumeMounts
    value:
    - name: secret-volume
      mountPath: /etc/secret-volume
  - op: add
    path: /spec/template/spec/volumes
    value:
    - name: secret-volume
      secret:
        secretName: example-cert
        items:
        - key: tls.crt
          path: crt
        - key: tls.key
          path: key
  - op: add
    path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/env/-
    value:
      name: TLS_SERVER_CERT
      value: /etc/secret-volume/crt
  - op: add
    path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/env/-
    value:
      name: TLS_SERVER_PRIVKEY
      value: /etc/secret-volume/key
  '

Configure the backend service to expose port 443. Apply the following to update ``backend`` service the ports to listen on 443:

.. code-block:: shell-session

>    apiVersion: v1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: yaml

   apiVersion: v1
```

Author: 🥴  good eye 🤦

   kind: Service
   metadata:
     labels:
       app: backend
       service: backend
     name: backend
   spec:
     selector:
       app: backend
     ports:
     - name: https
       port: 443
       protocol: TCP
       targetPort: 8443

Create the BackendTLSPolicy to tell the Cilium Gateway to use a TLS connection with the backend.

.. code-block:: yaml

   apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
   kind: BackendTLSPolicy
   metadata:
     name: enable-backend-tls
     namespace: default
   spec:
     targetRefs:
     - group: ''
       kind: Service
       name: backend
       sectionName: https
     validation:
       caCertificateRefs:
       - name: example-ca
         group: ''
         kind: ConfigMap
       hostname: www.example.com

Patch the HTTPRoute backend reference, so that it uses the correct port edited in the backend service.

.. code-block:: shell-session

   kubectl patch HTTPRoute backend --type=json --patch '
    - op: replace
      path: /spec/rules/0/backendRefs/0/port
      value: 443
   '

Testing the backend TLS connection
==================================

> Try curl the through the Gateway.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I feel like each time I look I see something different 😅 
```suggestion
Try curl the service through the Gateway.
```

Author: haha dont be sorry, I'm sorry lol 🙇

.. code-block:: shell-session

   $ curl -vI --resolve "www.example.com:80:<YOUR_GATEWAY_EXTERNAL_IP>" http://www.example.com:80/get

You should receive back a ``200 OK`` response. Note that the response also demonstrates the TLS encryption details:

.. code-block:: shell-session

   $ ...

>      "tls": {

Reviewer 2: The output here seems to be json, but at least naively if I run something like `curl -vI https://cilium.io` I don't get any json output. The code-block here is also for a shell session, but no commands are provided. How could someone following this guide observe the same output that the guide shows?

Reviewer 2: Ah! Duh I'm not following the actual guide here so this is the actual content response from the server :+1: 

Then my only comment would be to either (a) modify this to have the actual command or (b) switch this to json only and omit the `$ ...`.

Author: gotcha, that's how the response shows (with just the -v flag)
Good feedback, this curl command above is suppose to output it. ill update the wording to be clearer

      "version": "TLSv1.3",
      "serverName": "www.example.com",
      "negotiatedProtocol": "http/1.1",
      "cipherSuite": "TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256"
     }

>     } 

Reviewer: ```
7:34:26 PM: /opt/build/repo/Documentation/network/servicemesh/gateway-api/backendtlspolicy.rst:200: WARNING: Lexing literal_block '...\n "tls": {\n  "version": "TLSv1.3",\n  "serverName": "www.example.com",\n  "negotiatedProtocol": "http/1.1",\n  "cipherSuite": "TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256"\n }\n}' as "json" resulted in an error at token: '.'. Retrying in relaxed mode. [misc.highlighting_failure]
7:34:26 PM: make: *** [Makefile:157: html-netlify] Error 1
```

@xtineskim docu linter doesn't like the partial JSON.

either we have to change the code-block type to something else - e.g. `text`, `none` or change it to 

```
{
  "tls": {
    "version": "TLSv1.3",
    "serverName": "www.example.com",
    "negotiatedProtocol": "http/1.1",
    "cipherSuite": "TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256"
  }
}
``` 

(removed `...` with `{`

Author: ahh thanks for the catch! 👍

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

.. _gs_gateway_backendtlspolicy:

************************
BackendTLSPolicy Example
************************

This example will use the ``echo-server`` sample application to demonstrate how to use BackendTLSPolicy.

> You will also need mkcert to generate certificates.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You also need ``mkcert`` to generate certificates.
```

> You will also need mkcert to generate certificates.

Reviewer 2: nit: Maybe link to the official mkcert? I assume it's this one https://github.com/FiloSottile/mkcert ?

This task uses a self-signed CA, and is only for demonstration purposes.

Deploy ``echo-server``
======================

Apply the following to deploy the ``echo-server``.

> .. code-block::

Reviewer 3: Let's get syntax highlight:

```suggestion
.. code-block:: yaml
```

   apiVersion: v1
   kind: ServiceAccount
   metadata:
     name: backend

>    ---

Reviewer 2: It'd be good to add this example under `examples/` and then follow the literalinclude pattern we have documented here:

https://docs.cilium.io/en/stable/contributing/docs/docsstyle/#creating-configuration-files

   apiVersion: v1
   kind: Service
   metadata:
     name: backend
     labels:
       app: backend
       service: backend
   spec:
     ports:
       - name: http
         port: 3000
         targetPort: 3000
     selector:
       app: backend
   ---
   apiVersion: apps/v1
   kind: Deployment
   metadata:
     name: backend
   spec:
     replicas: 1
     selector:
       matchLabels:
         app: backend
         version: v1
     template:
       metadata:
         labels:
           app: backend
           version: v1
       spec:
         serviceAccountName: backend
         containers:
           - image: gcr.io/k8s-staging-gateway-api/echo-basic:v20231214-v1.0.0-140-gf544a46e
             imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
             name: backend
             ports:
               - containerPort: 3000
             env:
               - name: POD_NAME
                 valueFrom:
                   fieldRef:
                     fieldPath: metadata.name
               - name: NAMESPACE
                 valueFrom:
                   fieldRef:
                     fieldPath: metadata.namespace

Apply the following to create a Gateway and HTTPRoute for the ``echo-server``.

> .. code-block::

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Apply the following to create a Gateway and HTTPRoute for the ``echo-server``:

.. code-block:: yaml
```

   apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
   kind: Gateway
   metadata:
     name: my-gateway 
   spec:
     gatewayClassName: cilium
     listeners:
       - name: http
         protocol: HTTP
         port: 80

>     ---

Reviewer: looks like the second YAML document in the file is indented with 4 slashes instead of 3

    apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
    kind: HTTPRoute
    metadata:
      name: backend
    spec:
      parentRefs:
        - name: my-gateway
      hostnames:
        - "www.example.com"
      rules:
        - backendRefs:
            - group: ""
              kind: Service
              name: backend
              port: 3000
              weight: 1
          matches:
            - path:
                type: PathPrefix
                value: /

> Test the sample application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Test the sample application:
```

Same for the other commands below.

.. code-block:: shell-session

>    curl -vI -header "Host: www.example.com" <GATEWAY_IP_ADDRESS>/get

Reviewer 3: With `shell-session`, I'd recommend using the prompt symbol (here and for other commands below):

```suggestion
   $ curl -vI -header "Host: www.example.com" <GATEWAY_IP_ADDRESS>/get
```

>    curl -vI -header "Host: www.example.com" <GATEWAY_IP_ADDRESS>/get

Reviewer: `-header` isn't valid. either use `--header` or `-H`.

alternatively (what i prefer more) would be to use curl's resolve functionality instead of manually passing the host as header.

```
curl -vI --resolve www.example.com:80:<GATEWAY_IP_ADDRESS> http://www.example.com/get
```

Reviewer: definitely use --resolve as you already use this at the bottom too

> It should return a 200 OK response.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It should return a ``200 OK`` response.
```

Generate demo TLS Certificates
==============================

Generate the certificates and keys for example.com.

First, create the root certificate.

.. code-block:: shell-session

   mkcert www.example.com

This will output the certificate and key in the current directory.

> Create a certificate using the config file from above.

Reviewer 3: How?

Author: ah sorry meant to delete this line!

   kubectl create secret tls example-cert --key=www.example.com-key.pem --cert=www.example.com.pem

Create a configmap in your cluster.

.. code-block:: shell-session

   kubectl create configmap example-ca --from-file=ca.crt=www.example.com.pem

Setup TLS between gateway and backend
=====================================

Patch the backend deployment to enable TLS. We will mount the TLS certificate secret into the backend container as a volume.

.. code-block:: shell-session

   kubectl patch deployment backend --type=json --patch '
  - op: add
    path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/volumeMounts
    value:
    - name: secret-volume
      mountPath: /etc/secret-volume
  - op: add
    path: /spec/template/spec/volumes
    value:
    - name: secret-volume
      secret:
        secretName: example-cert
        items:
        - key: tls.crt
          path: crt
        - key: tls.key
          path: key
  - op: add
    path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/env/-
    value:
      name: TLS_SERVER_CERT
      value: /etc/secret-volume/crt
  - op: add
    path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/env/-
    value:
      name: TLS_SERVER_PRIVKEY
      value: /etc/secret-volume/key
  '

> Edit the backend service to expose port 443.

Reviewer: why no patch command here as well?

Author: 👍 no reason, will update it accordingly -- edited to be just apply the service since keeping the same name just to be configured looks cleaner than a patch command 🤔

> .. code-block::

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: yaml
```

> .. code-block::

Reviewer 2: I think some of these could also benefit from syntax highlighting:

```suggestion
.. code-block:: yaml
```

   apiVersion: v1
   kind: Service
   metadata:
     labels:
       app: backend
       service: backend
     name: backend

>      namespace: default

Reviewer: first time using a namespace whereas all previous resources didn't have an explicit namespace. either let's use an explicit namespace (with instructions how to create it) or don't define it and let the user decide.

   spec:
     selector:
       app: backend
     ports:
     - name: https
       port: 443
       protocol: TCP
       targetPort: 8443

Create the BackendTLSPolicy to tell the Cilium Gateway to use a TLS connection with the backend.

> .. code-block::

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: yaml
```
